* 16. Dispute resolution
    * 16.1 If a Dispute arises, the parties shall follow the procedure set out in this clause 16.
    * 16.2 Either party may give the other party written notice of a Dispute, setting out its nature and full particulars ("Notice of Dispute"), together with relevant supporting documents. Within five (5) business days of service of the Notice of Dispute, a UK Biobank representative and a representative from the Applicant shall attempt in good faith to resolve such Dispute.
    * 16.3 If for any reason the respective representatives of the parties are unable to resolve the Dispute within ten (10) business days of the Notice of Dispute, then any of the parties involved in the respective Dispute may refer it for discussion by UK Biobank's Principal Investigator and appropriate senior officer(s) of the Applicant. These senior representatives of the parties (or their respective nominees) shall seek to arrange a meeting or telephone, or videoconference call promptly with a view to resolving the Dispute.
    * 16.4 If, following escalation of any Dispute as set out in clause 16.3, UK Biobank's Principal Investigator and appropriate senior officer(s) of the Applicant are for any reason unable to resolve the Dispute within thirty (30) business days of it being escalated to them, then the parties agree to enter into mediation in good faith the settle the Dispute in accordance with the Centre for Effective Dispute Resolution (CEDR) Model Mediation Procedure. Unless otherwise agreed between the parties within 20 business days of service of the Notice of Dispute, the mediator shall be nominated by CEDR. To initiate the mediation, a party must serve notice in writing to the other party to the Dispute, referring the Dispute to mediation.
    * 16.5 For avoidance of doubt, Disputes with respect to scientific or technical issues or business decisions, and not legal issues, shall remain with senior representatives to be resolved.
    * 16.6 If the Dispute is not settled by mediation within 10 business days of commencement of mediation or within such further period as the parties may agree in writing, either party may issue court proceedings in accordance with clause 17.10 of this MTA.
    * 16.7 Nothing in this clause 16 shall serve to prevent any of the parties from seeking interim/injunctive relief to protect its rights and interests in any court of England and Wales; provided that such relief shall not prevent or stay any mediation.
* 17. General
    * 17.1 The parties agree that the Applicant may change the Applicant PI at any time, and from time to time, by written notice to UK Biobank provided that the Applicant ensures that the identity/status of the new Applicant PI is compliant with UK Biobank’s access criteria, access procedures and the relevant terms of this MTA.
    * 17.2 This MTA governs and constitutes the entire agreement between the parties and supersedes, replaces and extinguishes all previous agreements, promises, assurances, warranties, representations and understandings between them (whether oral or written) relating to the subject matter hereof. Further, each party acknowledges and agrees that it does not rely on, and shall have no remedy in respect of, any statement, promise, assurance, statement, warranty, undertaking or representation made (whether innocently or negligently) by the other party or any other person except as expressly set out in this MTA in respect of which its sole remedy shall be for breach of contract.
    * 17.3 If there is any conflict between the provisions of this MTA and any of the Annexes, then the provisions of the relevant Annex shall apply.
    * 17.4 A waiver, delay or forbearance by any party, whether express or implied, in enforcing or exercising any of its rights or remedies hereunder shall not constitute a waiver of such right or remedy, unless set forth in a writing signed by the waiving party.
    * 17.5 No provision of this MTA is intended to be enforceable by any person who is not a party to this MTA and nor are any rights granted to any third party under statute or otherwise.
    * 17.6 Nothing in this MTA shall create a partnership, joint venture or relationship of agency among the parties.
    * 17.7 All variations to this MTA must be agreed, set out in writing and signed on behalf of the parties before they take effect.
    * 17.8 If any provision or part-provision of this MTA is or becomes invalid, illegal or unenforceable, it shall be deemed deleted, but that shall not affect the validity and enforceability of the rest of this MTA.
    * 17.9 If any provision or part-provision of this MTA is deemed deleted under clause 17.8, the parties shall negotiate in good faith to agree a replacement provision that, to the greatest extent possible, achieves the intended commercial result of the original provision.
    * 17.10 This MTA and any dispute or claim (including non-contractual disputes or claims) arising out of or in connection with it or its subject matter or formation shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of England and Wales. Subject to clause 16 above, the parties irrevocably agree that the English courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction over any suit, action, proceedings or dispute arising out of, or in connection with this MTA or its subject matter or formation.