* 13. Notices
    * 13.1 Notices required under this MTA shall be in writing and shall be:
        * 13.1.1 sent by email to the addresses set out below; or
        * 13.1.2 (in the event of failure to deliver an email) by post to the registered address of UK Biobank or the Applicant.
    * 13.2 Any notice shall be deemed to be received:
        * 13.2.1 if sent by email, upon receipt at the recipient’s email server, (or, if this time falls outside business hours in the place of receipt, when business hours resume); or
        * 13.2.2 if sent by post, on the date of delivery if a business day in the place of receipt (or, if not a business day, on the first business day thereafter).
    * 13.3 Notices to UK Biobank shall be sent to the access team at access@ukbiobank.ac.uk. Notices to the Applicant shall be sent by email to the relevant Applicant and the Applicant PI.
* 14. Affiliates, assignment and sub-contracting
    * Affiliates
    * 14.1 The rights granted to the Applicant under this MTA for the Approved Research Project include the Affiliates of the Applicant, subject to the Applicant:
        * 14.1.1 providing updated details of each Affiliate in the Annual Project Report submitted to UK Biobank on an annual basis in accordance with clause 7.1 of the MTA;
        * 14.1.2 remaining fully liable and responsible to UK Biobank for all acts, defaults and omissions of each of its Affiliates as if they were the Applicant’s own; and
        * 14.1.3 ensuring that each of its Affiliates comply with the terms and conditions of this MTA.
    * Assignment
    * 14.2 Neither UK Biobank nor the Applicant shall be entitled to assign this MTA or any of its rights or obligations hereunder without first having received the written approval of the other party, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed.
    * Subcontracting
    * 14.3 Other than in the circumstances set out in clause 14.5, the Applicant shall not sub-contract the performance of any of its obligations under the MTA or any part thereof without having first obtained the prior written consent of UK Biobank, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld.
    * 14.4 In the event that consent is granted under clause 14.3, the relevant Applicant shall be responsible for the acts, defaults and omissions of its sub-contractors as if they were the Applicant’s own, and any consent given shall not relieve such relevant Applicant of any of its obligations under this MTA.
    * Third-Party Processors
    * 14.5 UK Biobank acknowledges and agrees that the Applicant may subcontract to third party processors to process the Materials strictly for the Permitted Purpose and only in relation to discrete elements of data computation and analysis (such processors being, "Third-Party Processors"). The Applicant must comply with, and only engage Third-Party Processors strictly in accordance with the terms set out in clauses 14.6 to 14.10 inclusive.
    * 14.6 The Applicant warrants that the Third-Party Processor is not a Collaborator and shall only be engaged for the purposes of discrete elements of data computation and analysis in relation to the Permitted Purpose (the "Processor Task").
    * 14.7 Prior to engaging a Third-Party Processor, the Applicant shall conduct and document the following assessment:
        * 14.7.1 whether the Third-Party Processor is necessary for the progress of the research aims of the Approved Research Project;
        * 14.7.2 whether the Third-Party Processor is a suitable recipient for the data in terms of both its provenance on past data security and past data usage / activities (for example Cambridge Analytica would not qualify); and
        * 14.7.3 whether the Third-Party Processor is able to provide sufficient assurance(s) that it shall process the Materials in a manner that will meet the requirements of Data Protection Legislation.
    * 14.8 The Applicant shall:
        * 14.8.1 remain fully responsible to UK Biobank for all acts, defaults and omissions of the Third-Party Processor as if they were the Applicant's own;
        * 14.8.2 provide only such Materials to the Third-Party Processor as is strictly necessary for the Third-Party Processor to perform the Processor Task;
        * 14.8.3 provide details of each Third-Party Processor and the Processor Task in the Annual Project Report submitted to UK Biobank on an annual basis in accordance with clause 7.1 of the MTA; and
        * 14.8.4 only engage the Third-Party Processor on the basis that a written agreement with the Third-Party Processor is executed prior to any data transfer or processing of Materials taking place. Such agreement must include inter alia:
            * (a) a clear definition and scope of the Processor Task, including an agreement only to process the data in accordance with the Applicant’s documented instructions;
            * (b) to authorise the Third-Party Processor only to undertake the Processor Task and not to perform any other act, unless expressly authorised to do so;
            * (c) to store, process and use the Materials to the security standards set out in the MTA (as a minimum) and implements appropriate technical and organisational security measures to protect the Materials against a Data Security Incident;
            * (d) to delete (or render permanently inaccessible) the Materials (and any data generated as a result of the Processor Task) once the Processor Task has been completed;
            * (e) to confirm that the Third-Party Processor has no rights (directly or indirectly) in either any Materials (or data derived therefrom) or from anything which the Applicant has created or done as part of the Approved Research Project (which is covered by the MTA between UK Biobank and the Applicant);
            * (f) to confirm that the Third-Party Processor is bound by the provisions which are equivalent to the relevant provisions in the MTA, including, but not limited to: a) not to transfer the Materials (or data derived therefrom) to any third party and b) not to make any attempt to re-identify any Participant;
            * (g) that the Third-Party Processor provides sufficient assurance(s) that it shall process the Materials in a manner that will meet the requirement of Data Protection Legislation; and
            * (h) that the Applicant has an unfettered unilateral right to terminate its agreement with the Third-Party Processor immediately if a material problem arises (including a breach by the Third-Party Processor of any of the above provisions).
    * 14.9 The Applicant must keep the activities of the Third-Party Processor under reasonable review in order to ensure compliance with clauses 14.5 to 14.10 inclusive.
    * 14.10 In the event that UK Biobank raises any concern regarding the identity of the Third-Party Processor or the activities of a Third-Party Processor, the Applicant shall investigate and report on the matter promptly. UK Biobank may require, if reasonably necessary (and subject to a dialogue with the Applicant), the Applicant to:
        * 14.10.1 to audit the Third-Party Processor; and / or
        * 14.10.2 terminate the agreement with the Third-Party Processor.
* 15. Force majeure
    * 15.1 If a party is prevented from, hindered or delayed in performing any of its obligations under this MTA by reason of a Force Majeure Event, such party shall promptly notify the other of the date of its commencement and the effects of the Force Majeure Event on its ability to perform its obligations under this MTA. If mutually agreed by the parties, then the obligations of the party so affected shall thereupon be suspended for so long as the Force Majeure Event may continue.
    * 15.2 The party affected by a Force Majeure Event shall not be liable for any failure to perform or delay in performing such of its obligations as are prevented, hindered or delayed by the Force Majeure Event provided that such party shall use every reasonable effort to minimise the effects thereof and shall resume performance as soon as possible after the removal of such Force Majeure Event. If the period of non-performance exceeds 90 days from the start of the Force Majeure Event then the non-affected party shall have the option, by written notice to the other party, to terminate this MTA by giving thirty (30) days’ written notice to the other party.
    * 15.3 The provisions of this clause 15 shall not affect any other right which any party may have to terminate this MTA.
* 16. Dispute resolution
    * 16.1 If a Dispute arises, the parties shall follow the procedure set out in this clause 16.
    * 16.2 Either party may give the other party written notice of a Dispute, setting out its nature and full particulars ("Notice of Dispute"), together with relevant supporting documents. Within five (5) business days of service of the Notice of Dispute, a UK Biobank representative and a representative from the Applicant shall attempt in good faith to resolve such Dispute.
    * 16.3 If for any reason the respective representatives of the parties are unable to resolve the Dispute within ten (10) business days of the Notice of Dispute, then any of the parties involved in the respective Dispute may refer it for discussion by UK Biobank's Principal Investigator and appropriate senior officer(s) of the Applicant. These senior representatives of the parties (or their respective nominees) shall seek to arrange a meeting or telephone, or videoconference call promptly with a view to resolving the Dispute.
    * 16.4 If, following escalation of any Dispute as set out in clause 16.3, UK Biobank's Principal Investigator and appropriate senior officer(s) of the Applicant are for any reason unable to resolve the Dispute within thirty (30) business days of it being escalated to them, then the parties agree to enter into mediation in good faith the settle the Dispute in accordance with the Centre for Effective Dispute Resolution (CEDR) Model Mediation Procedure. Unless otherwise agreed between the parties within 20 business days of service of the Notice of Dispute, the mediator shall be nominated by CEDR. To initiate the mediation, a party must serve notice in writing to the other party to the Dispute, referring the Dispute to mediation.
    * 16.5 For avoidance of doubt, Disputes with respect to scientific or technical issues or business decisions, and not legal issues, shall remain with senior representatives to be resolved.
    * 16.6 If the Dispute is not settled by mediation within 10 business days of commencement of mediation or within such further period as the parties may agree in writing, either party may issue court proceedings in accordance with clause 17.10 of this MTA.
    * 16.7 Nothing in this clause 16 shall serve to prevent any of the parties from seeking interim/injunctive relief to protect its rights and interests in any court of England and Wales; provided that such relief shall not prevent or stay any mediation.
* 17. General
    * 17.1 The parties agree that the Applicant may change the Applicant PI at any time, and from time to time, by written notice to UK Biobank provided that the Applicant ensures that the identity/status of the new Applicant PI is compliant with UK Biobank’s access criteria, access procedures and the relevant terms of this MTA.
    * 17.2 This MTA governs and constitutes the entire agreement between the parties and supersedes, replaces and extinguishes all previous agreements, promises, assurances, warranties, representations and understandings between them (whether oral or written) relating to the subject matter hereof. Further, each party acknowledges and agrees that it does not rely on, and shall have no remedy in respect of, any statement, promise, assurance, statement, warranty, undertaking or representation made (whether innocently or negligently) by the other party or any other person except as expressly set out in this MTA in respect of which its sole remedy shall be for breach of contract.
    * 17.3 If there is any conflict between the provisions of this MTA and any of the Annexes, then the provisions of the relevant Annex shall apply.
    * 17.4 A waiver, delay or forbearance by any party, whether express or implied, in enforcing or exercising any of its rights or remedies hereunder shall not constitute a waiver of such right or remedy, unless set forth in a writing signed by the waiving party.
    * 17.5 No provision of this MTA is intended to be enforceable by any person who is not a party to this MTA and nor are any rights granted to any third party under statute or otherwise.
    * 17.6 Nothing in this MTA shall create a partnership, joint venture or relationship of agency among the parties.
    * 17.7 All variations to this MTA must be agreed, set out in writing and signed on behalf of the parties before they take effect.
    * 17.8 If any provision or part-provision of this MTA is or becomes invalid, illegal or unenforceable, it shall be deemed deleted, but that shall not affect the validity and enforceability of the rest of this MTA.
    * 17.9 If any provision or part-provision of this MTA is deemed deleted under clause 17.8, the parties shall negotiate in good faith to agree a replacement provision that, to the greatest extent possible, achieves the intended commercial result of the original provision.
    * 17.10 This MTA and any dispute or claim (including non-contractual disputes or claims) arising out of or in connection with it or its subject matter or formation shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of England and Wales. Subject to clause 16 above, the parties irrevocably agree that the English courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction over any suit, action, proceedings or dispute arising out of, or in connection with this MTA or its subject matter or formation.