* 1. Supply of Materials by UK Biobank
    * 1.1 UK Biobank agrees to supply the Materials to the Applicant in the timeframe and manner set out in this MTA, subject to the provisions of this MTA.
    * 1.2 UK Biobank warrants to the Applicant that for the purposes of this MTA:
        * 1.2.1 it is entitled to supply the Materials to the Applicant;
        * 1.2.2 consent to take part in UK Biobank has been obtained from the Participants and further, consent under the Human Tissue Act 2004, has been obtained from the relevant Participants; and
        * 1.2.3 the use of the Materials for the Approved Research Project falls within UK Biobank's generic Research Tissue Bank (RTB) approval from the NHS North West REC, available here.
    * 1.3 The Applicant agrees that the Materials are provided on an "as is" basis without any warranty of satisfactory quality or fitness for a particular purpose or use, or that use of the Materials shall not infringe the rights of any third party. Except as expressly stated in this MTA, all warranties, terms and conditions, whether express or implied by statute, common law or otherwise, are excluded to the fullest extent permitted by law.
* 2. Usage of Materials by the Applicant
    * 2.1 The Applicant agrees that the Materials:
        * 2.1.1 shall only be used in accordance with the terms and conditions of this MTA;
        * 2.1.2 shall only be used to conduct the Approved Research Project for the Permitted Purpose only;
        * 2.1.3 shall not be used for any purpose connected with prohibited weapons (including biological weapons), and shall not be transferred if it is known or suspected that they are intended or likely to be used for such purposes;
        * 2.1.4 shall not be transferred to a destination subject to a UN, EU, UK or OSCE embargo where that act would be in breach of the terms of that embargo; and
        * 2.1.5 shall only be used by the Applicant institution and on an individual level within the Applicant, by the Applicant Pl, the Applicant Researchers and by Affiliates and Third-Party Processors (appointed by the Applicant).
    * 2.2 The Applicant shall not share, sub-license, disclose, transfer, sell, gift or supply the Materials to any other person or unauthorised third party.
    * 2.3 Without prejudice to the other provisions of this MTA, any actual or anticipatory breach of any provision of clauses 2.1 or 2.2 shall entitle UK Biobank to terminate this Agreement with immediate effect and require the immediate return or destruction of any Materials provided by UK Biobank.
    * 2.4 The Applicant shall and shall procure cure that the Applicant Pl, the Applicant Researchers and any Affiliate and any Third-Party Processors are made aware of, and shall comply with, the terms and conditions of this MTA and the Data Protection Legislation. Any act or omission of the Applicant Pl or any Applicant Researcher or any Affiliate or any Third-Party Processor shall be deemed to be an act of the relevant Applicant for which the relevant Applicant is fully responsible and liable.
    * 2.5 This MTA confers on the Applicant only those rights that are expressly granted to the Applicant.
    * 2.6 In relation to the Materials supplied to the Applicant:
        * 2.6.1 UK Biobank is the owner of the Materials, and UK Biobank is the owner of the Intellectual Property Rights in the Materials; and
        * 2.6.2 UK Biobank hereby grants to the Applicant a revocable, worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive, non-transferable licence (but not any ownership rights) during the Term to use the Materials for the Permitted Purpose, subject to the terms and conditions of this MTA.
* 3. Generation of data by the Applicant
    * 3.1 The data generated by the Applicant in the performance of the Approved Research Project shall be deemed to fall into the following categories:
        * 3.1.1 Results Data: data and methodology (for example, the SAS/R/Stata scripts) which underlie the Findings, and which would enable another competent researcher to generate the Findings;
        * 3.1.2 Findings: the findings generated by the Applicant as a result of the Approved Research Project; and/or
        * 3.1.3 Other Data: all other data generated by the Applicant which is not in one of the above two categories.
    * 3.2 Except as provided in clause 3.3, the Applicant shall own the IPRs in their Findings, the Results Data and the Other Data. The Applicant hereby grants a perpetual, irrevocable, worldwide, fully paid up, royalty free, fully sub-licensable non-exclusive licence to UK Biobank to use, reproduce, distribute, publish, store and otherwise disseminate the Findings, the Results Data and the Other Data.
    * 3.3 Nothing in this MTA shall operate to assign to the Applicant any IPRs in the Materials.
    * 3.4 The Applicant confirms to UK Biobank that UK Biobank's receipt of and use of the Applicant's Findings and Results Data shall not infringe the rights, including any existing IPRS, of any third party. Such confirmation shall be:
        * 3.4.1 deemed to be taken at the time, respectively, of the publication of the Findings or the return of the Results Data to UK Biobank; and
        * 3.4.2 given to the best of the Applicant's knowledge and belief, having made reasonable and diligent enquiry (but the extent of this obligation does not include any requirement on the Applicant to conduct external patent searches).
    * 3.5 Subject always to the restriction in clause 3.7, UK Biobank confirms that it shall have no rights or licence to the IPRs in relation to any inventions made by the Applicant as a result of using the Materials, Results Data, Findings or Other Data ("Applicant-Generated Inventions").
    * 3.6 However, the Applicant acknowledges that the UK Biobank resource has been produced using a combination of the goodwill and contribution of 500,000 UK participants, charitable and public funding, the use of public resources (such as UK health-record data) and established with the express purpose of promoting the conduct of health-related research which is in the public interest.
    * 3.7 Taking into account the acknowledgements in clause 3.6, the Applicant agrees that it shall not and shall not attempt to:
        * 3.7.1 file any patents with claims directed to; or
        * 3.7.2 otherwise seek to claim or enforce any IPRs in;
        * the genotype-phenotype data within the Materials or in the genotype-phenotype data which has been generated by the Applicant in the course of the Approved Research Project.
    * 3.8 UK Biobank expressly excludes any right of the Applicant to sub-licence any of the rights granted to the Materials under this MTA or to publish or distribute any of the Materials, except for the sole purpose of including a commensurate amount of supporting data in the Applicant's publication of its Findings.
    * 3.9 For the avoidance of doubt, the rights granted under this MTA to the Applicant to use the Materials are for the Permitted Purpose only.
* 4. Confirmations from the Applicant
    * 4.1 The Applicant confirms to UK Biobank that all work performed by it using the Materials shall be carried out in compliance with:
        * 4.1.1 all applicable laws, regulations, guidelines and approvals, including without limitation the Human Tissue Act 2004, the Data Protection Legislation and any approvals required from a Research Ethics Committee (or the applicable equivalent in the jurisdiction where the Approved Research Project is to be conducted); and
        * 4.1.2 all applicable trade restrictions and export controls, including without limitation all sanctions, meaning those trade, economic and financial sanctions laws, regulations, embargoes, and restrictive measures (in each case having the force of law) administered, enacted or enforced from time to time by (i) the United Kingdom; (ii) the United States; (iii) the European Union and its Member States; (iv) the United Nations; or (v) other governments.
    * 4.2 The Applicant shall retain the Materials in a secure network system, at a standard which would be reasonably expected for the storage of valuable and proprietary sensitive/confidential data. In addition, the Applicant shall be obliged to implement the appropriate technical and organisational measures as set out in Annex 2 (Security Measures) to protect the Materials from the accidental or unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, or access to the Materials (a "Data Security Incident"). By signing this MTA, the Applicant Pl confirms that the Security Measures set out in Annex 2 are in place in order to protect the Materials.
    * 4.3 The Applicant shall notify UK Biobank without undue delay (and in any event no later than 24 hours) after becoming aware of a reasonably suspected "near miss" or actual Data Security Incident which affects the Materials. Such notification must be sent by email to DPO@ukbiobank.ac.uk with a copy to access@ukbiobank.ac.uk.
        * 4.3.1 The Applicant shall not delay such notification on the basis that the information is incomplete, or the relevant investigation is ongoing. Further, the Applicant shall not make any external announcement, notifications to a supervisory authority or regulator about any such Data Security Incident without the express prior written consent of UK Biobank, unless required by law to do so.
        * 4.3.2 Both parties shall cooperate and provide reasonable assistance to each other to facilitate the handling of the Data Security Incident.
    * 4.4 The Applicant confirms that it shall deal promptly and appropriately (in accordance with the Participants option to withdraw as set out on the UK Biobank website here) with any "no further use" withdrawals by Participants which UK Biobank notifies to the Applicant.
    * 4.5 The Applicant is expressly prohibited from (or attempting to):
        * 4.5.1 developing, linking or re-engineering the Materials supplied to it so as to identify (directly or indirectly) any Participant;
        * 4.5.2 identifying any Participant from the Materials provided by UK Biobank; or
        * 4.5.3 contacting any Participant.
    * 4.6 In the event that the Applicant inadvertently identifies any Participant then it shall notify UK Biobank immediately setting out (in reasonable detail) the circumstances by which it happened. Such notification must be sent by email to DPO@ukbiobank.ac.uk with a copy to access@ukbiobank.ac.uk.
    * 4.7 Other than for the purposes of clause 4.6, the Applicant shall not:
        * 4.7.1 share the identification of that Participant with any other person; or
        * 4.7.2 attempt to contact the Participant themselves.
    * 4.8 Without prejudice to the other provisions of this MTA, any actual or anticipatory breach of any provision of clauses 4.1, 4.2 and 4.4 to 4.7 inclusive shall entitle UK Biobank to terminate this Agreement with immediate effect and require the immediate return or destruction of any Materials provided by UK Biobank.
* 5. Publication of lay summary, submission of annual report and return and publication of Findings
    * 5.1 After the Applicant has received the Materials for the Approved Research Project, UK Biobank shall be entitled to publish on its website:
        * 5.1.1 the lay summary of the Approved Research Project contained in the Application (with the exception of any material that has been agreed by UK Biobank would be kept confidential); and
        * 5.1.2 summary details of the Applicant.
    * 5.2 During the Term, the Applicant shall provide UK Biobank with:
        * 5.2.1 a report (with a summary section) setting out in reasonable detail the progress of the Approved Research Project in the form attached as Annex 3 (or in such other format as required by UK Biobank from time to time) on an annual basis (from the Effective Date) which shall include the Findings the Applicant has made which in its reasonable view may be:
            * (a) published or pending publication;
            * (b) disclosed in a published patent; or
            * (c) otherwise of significance (in the context of medical research); and
        * 5.2.2 a summary (and a copy of the application if requested) of any patents whose claims cover, or are intended to cover, an Applicant-Generated Invention within two (2) months of their publication.
    * 5.3 In relation to the Annual Project Report, UK Biobank:
        * 5.3.1 shall have the ability to make the summary section of the Annual Project Report public, subject to the Applicant (as referred to in clause 5.7 below) retaining a reasonable period of confidentiality on items where patent rights still need to be filed; and
        * 5.3.2 shall have the opportunity to ask the Applicant any reasonable questions arising from the Annual Project Report and the Applicant shall respond to such questions in a timely manner.
    * 5.4 If the Annual Project Report, or any other information or data provided to UK Biobank, contains any technology or data that is subject to applicable export controls, it shall be the responsibility of the Applicant to obtain any export licence that may be required to authorise the transmission of the Annual Project Report, information or data to UK Biobank. The Applicant shall notify UK Biobank at least one week in advance that an Annual Project Report, information or data is to be sent under an export licence and shall provide UK Biobank with full details of the conditions of the licence and of the reasons for the control of the technology contained in the Annual Project Report, information or data.
    * 5.5 In the event that the Annual Project Report is not received by UK Biobank in the timeframe, manner and form prescribed, then the Applicant's rights under this MTA shall be suspended and the Applicant (together with any Collaborators) will not be able to download further data (either in terms of new data fields or updates of existing data fields) or access existing data via the research access platform until such time as the Annual Project Report has been duly and compliantly provided. If the Annual Project Report is still outstanding, notwithstanding reminders from UK Biobank, 3 months after the relevant anniversary of the Effective Date, then UK Biobank has the right to terminate this MTA by giving the Applicant written notice of termination and/or prevent the Applicant Institution (or Applicant PI) from applying for or accessing any further Materials from UK Biobank.
    * 5.6 The Applicant shall use All Reasonable Endeavours to publish the Findings (and provide UK Biobank with a link thereto) within six (6) months after the Completion Date for the Approved Research Project:
        * 5.6.1 in an academic journal; or
        * 5.6.2 on an open-source publication site.
    * 5.7 UK Biobank acknowledge and agree that the Applicant may keep such Findings confidential for a reasonable time in accordance with its reasonable research and development practices. For the avoidance of doubt, the Applicant is entitled to retain confidentiality regarding any Finding over which patent protection is being sought (and the patent has not yet been published).
    * 5.8 If such Findings are made publicly available, UK Biobank requires that the Results Data underlying such Findings shall be promptly returned or otherwise made available to UK Biobank. UK Biobank also requires that the Results Data are returned in a format which is appropriate and comprehensible (particularly for other researchers) along with any documentation which would be reasonably necessary to enable another researcher to interpret and understand the Results Data.
    * 5.9 Within six (6) months after the publication of the Findings, the relevant Applicant shall provide to UK Biobank the Results Data in such form and format as set out in clause 5.8 above (alternatively UK Biobank and the relevant Applicant may agree that the relevant Applicant retains the Results Data on the basis that they are made publicly available to other Researchers and/or publicly available generally).
    * 5.10 UK Biobank shall consider reasonably any written requests (containing an appropriate explanation) for an extension of the time limits set out in this clause.
    * 5.11 The Applicant shall use All Reasonable Endeavours to publish a commensurate level of Findings in relation to the Approved Research Project within the first three (3) years of the Term (and in any subsequent extensions). Where this is not possible, the Applicant shall provide UK Biobank with a reasonable explanation as to why it is not possible and an estimation of when a publication can be expected.
    * 5.12 Unless otherwise stated in Annex 4, the Applicant is not required to obtain UK Biobank's approval to any report of its Findings. The Applicant shall nevertheless provide a copy of any report of its Findings and any press release to UK Biobank at least two (2) weeks before their expected date of first public presentation or publication in any format (e.g., paper journal, on-line report, meeting abstract). The Applicant shall upload such documents to AMS in the first instance. If this is not possible, the Applicant shall email such documents to access@ukbiobank.ac.uk.
    * 5.13 However, and notwithstanding the provisions of clause 5.12 above, the Applicant is required to promptly notify UK Biobank in advance (in writing) if any report of its Findings is reasonably likely to provoke controversy or otherwise attract significant public attention. In such circumstances, UK Biobank reserves the right to make such recommendations, reservations or suggestions on the report as it sees fit (and which it may make public) for consideration by the Applicant.
    * 5.14 UK Biobank requires that the term "UK Biobank" is incorporated within the title and/or the abstract of any and all publications.
    * 5.15 UK Biobank requires that any and all publications of Findings using UK Biobank data include the following credit, which should be incorporated within the "Acknowledgements" of such publication: "This research has been conducted using the UK Biobank Resource under application number [ ]."
    * 5.16 This acknowledgement to UK Biobank should, when possible, be linked to reference search tools (such as PubMed and MEDLINE and/or DOI reference).
* 6. Charges
    * 6.1 The Applicant agrees to pay the Access Charges as set out in the payment section of the Applicant's Application to UK Biobank via bank transfer or Sage Pay, and in British pounds sterling (GBP). The Access Charges are stated to be exclusive of VAT. The Applicant shall pay any applicable VAT in addition to the Access Charges.
    * 6.2 When paying the Access Charges, the Applicant shall quote the invoice number and/or Application Reference Number as the payment reference, and also send a remittance note to creditcontrol@ukbiobank.ac.uk.
    * 6.3 The rights granted to the Applicant by UK Biobank under this MTA are conditional on the Access Charges (and applicable VAT) being paid and so, for the avoidance of doubt, no Materials shall be provided to the Applicant until or unless the Access Charges (and applicable VAT) are received in full.
    * 6.4 If payment of the Access Charges (and applicable VAT) has not been made within ninety (90) days of receipt of this MTA by the Applicant, the Applicant shall be required to re-apply for access to the UK Biobank resource and Materials.
* 7. Annual Confirmation and Audit
    * 7.1 During the Term, UK Biobank requires the Applicant Pl to confirm on an annual basis that the Approved Research Project remains compliant with the provisions of the MTA (and the Annexes). Specifically, the Applicant PI shall provide UK Biobank with such confirmation as part of the Annual Project Report in the form attached at Annex 3. In the event that the Annual Project Report is not received by UK Biobank in the timeframe, manner and form prescribed, UK Biobank reserves the rights set out in clause 5.5 above.
    * 7.2 In circumstances where UK Biobank reasonably believes that a Data Security Incident or other serious incident has occurred then, on notice to the Applicant, in order to confirm or investigate compliance with the provisions of this MTA, UK Biobank may itself or via appropriate third parties:
        * 7.2.1 choose to undertake an audit (either in person or remotely) in order to review the security, storage or other arrangements for the Materials; and
        * 7.2.2 request such additional information about the Approved Research Project and/or its progress as UK Biobank may, from time to time, reasonably require.
    * 7.3 UK Biobank shall bear the costs of such audits unless a material default within the procedures and processes of the relevant Applicant is discovered, in which case the relevant Applicant shall be obliged to reimburse the reasonable costs of UK Biobank and any relevant third parties.
    * 7.4 UK Biobank confirms that its audit rights shall be exercisable no more than once a year and on the provision of reasonable notice (which may be immediate in the event of a Data Security Incident or other serious incident) to the Applicant. As far as practically possible, UK Biobank agrees to coordinate any site visits and audits with the other relevant parties.
* 8. Confidentiality
    * 8.1 Subject to the exceptions in clause 8.2, UK Biobank shall keep confidential any information disclosed to it in writing by the Applicant that is marked confidential ("Applicant's Confidential Information") and shall not disclose such information to any person.
    * 8.2 UK Biobank may disclose the Applicant's Confidential Information where expressly permitted by this MTA or when:
        * 8.2.1 it is required to be disclosed by law, by any governmental or other regulatory authority, by a court or other authority of competent jurisdiction; or
        * 8.2.2 it can be shown by UK Biobank (to the Applicant's reasonable satisfaction) to have been known by UK Biobank before disclosure to it by such Applicant; or
        * 8.2.3 it was lawfully disclosed to UK Biobank by a third party who did not impose any restrictions on its disclosure; or
        * 8.2.4 the information was in (or enters into) the public domain other than by reason of a breach of this clause by UK Biobank; or
        * 8.2.5 UK Biobank and the Applicant agree, acting reasonably, that such information is trivial or obvious, or they agree in writing that such disclosure may be permitted.
* 9. Data Protection
    * Relationship of the parties
    * 9.1 The parties acknowledge that UK Biobank and the Applicant are independent controllers with respect to the Participant Level Data that is processed in accordance with this MTA, and that the Applicant shall process the Participant Level Data strictly for the Permitted Purpose. In no event shall the parties process the Participant Level Data as joint controllers.
    * 9.2 Each party shall be individually and separately responsible for complying with the obligations that apply to it as a controller under Data Protection Legislation.
    * Cooperation
    * 9.3 In the event that the Applicant, Applicant PI or any Applicant Researcher receives any correspondence, enquiry or complaint from a Participant, regulator or other third party ("Correspondence") in connection with the processing of the Participant Level Data, it shall promptly inform UK Biobank giving full details of the same. In all circumstances, the Applicant, Applicant PI or any Applicant Researcher shall: (i) obtain UK Biobank's written approval before responding to the Correspondence, including approval of the contents of any response; and (ii) subject to Data Protection Legislation, permit UK Biobank to respond directly to the Correspondence.
    * Where the Applicant is located outside of the UK
    * 9.4 Where UK Biobank transfers Participant Level Data to an Applicant outside the UK to a territory that has not been specified as ensuring an adequate level of protection in accordance with Data Protection Legislation, the parties agree that the UK Addendum shall be automatically incorporated into this MTA by reference and deemed to be completed as set out in Part B of Annex 1 of this MTA.
    * 9.5 If there is any conflict between the MTA and the UK Addendum, the UK Addendum will prevail.
    * International transfers by the Applicant
    * 9.6 The Applicant shall not process any Participant Level Data (nor permit any Participant Level Data to be processed) in a territory outside of the UK (or where clause 9.4 applies, where processing occurs in a subsequent territory) unless it has taken such measures as are necessary to ensure the transfer is in compliance with Data Protection Legislation.
* 10. Limitation of Liability
    * 10.1 The parties agree that:
        * 10.1.1 subject to clauses 10.2, 10.3 and 10.4, UK Biobank’s maximum aggregate Liability under this MTA and/or in relation to the Approved Research Project shall be limited to the Access Charges paid or payable by the Applicant to UK Biobank (whether or not invoiced to the Applicant) in relation to the Approved Research Project; and
        * 10.1.2 subject to clauses 10.2, 10.3 and 10.5, the Applicant's maximum aggregate Liability under this MTA and/or in relation to the Approved Research Project shall be limited to the Access Charges paid or payable by the Applicant to UK Biobank (whether or not invoiced to the Applicant) in relation to the Approved Research Project.
    * 10.2 Notwithstanding clause 10.1 above, UK Biobank shall have no Liability to the Applicant and the Applicant shall have no Liability to UK Biobank for any:
        * 10.2.1 loss of profit (whether direct, indirect or consequential);
        * 10.2.2 loss of use, loss of revenue, loss of production or loss of business (in each case whether direct, indirect or consequential);
        * 10.2.3 loss of goodwill, loss of reputation or loss of opportunity (in each case whether direct, indirect or consequential);
        * 10.2.4 loss of anticipated savings or loss of margin (in each case whether direct, indirect or consequential);
        * 10.2.5 loss of use or value of any data or software (in each case whether direct, indirect or consequential); or
        * 10.2.6 indirect or consequential loss.
    * 10.3 Nothing in this MTA shall operate to exclude or limit any Liability which cannot legally be limited including but not limited to liability for:
        * 10.3.1 death or personal injury caused by negligence;
        * 10.3.2 for its fraud or fraudulent misrepresentation; and
        * 10.3.3 for any matter for which it is not permitted by law to exclude or limit, or to attempt to exclude or limit, its Liability.
    * 10.4 For the avoidance of doubt, UK Biobank shall have no responsibility or Liability (including but without limitation any product-related Liability) for any finding, product, test or treatment developed directly or indirectly by the Applicant using the Materials.
    * 10.5 Nothing in this MTA shall operate to exclude or limit the Applicant’s Liability to UK Biobank for any loss, damage, costs or expenses arising from:
        * 10.5.1 the Applicant’s failure to comply with clause 9 (Data Protection) and clauses 14.5 to 14.10 inclusive (Third-Party Processors);
        * 10.5.2 any breach of clause 2.2 or any circumstance in which the Applicant sub-licenses, distributes or otherwise shares the Materials (including any IPRs) with any unauthorised person or third party;
        * 10.5.3 any circumstance set out in clauses 4.5 and 4.7; and
        * 10.5.4 any Data Security Incident which is caused by the Applicant.
* 11. Term
    * 11.1 The term of this MTA shall commence on the Effective Date and shall end on the Completion Date unless terminated sooner in accordance with clause 12 or in accordance with law.
    * 11.2 The Term of this MTA may be extended by the Applicant (and with the agreement of UK Biobank) during the final year of the Approved Research Project in the following one (1) year increments:
        * 11.2.1 for a minimum of period of one (1) year;
        * 11.2.2 for a period of two (2) years; or
        * 11.2.3 for a maximum period of three (3) years;
    * on application to UK Biobank setting out (in reasonable detail) the reasons for the extension request and subject to the payment of the relevant further Access Charges.
    * 11.3 For the avoidance of doubt, the extensions set out in clause 11.2 above can be applied cumulatively (subject to applicable Access Charges) so that, for example, an extension of 3 years may be granted to take the Approved Research Project duration from 3 years to 6 years, and this may then be extended by a further 3 years to 9 years and so on.
* 12. Termination and consequences of termination
    * 12.1 UK Biobank shall be entitled to terminate this MTA immediately by written notice to the Applicant if the Applicant:
        * 12.1.1 commits any breach of a material provision of this MTA or a material breach of this MTA, and, in the case of a breach capable of remedy, fails to remedy the same within 10 days after receipt of a written notice giving particulars of the breach and requiring it to be remedied; or
        * 12.1.2 ceases, is likely to cease, or threatens to cease carrying on business or suffers an Insolvency Event, or is subject to a serious, adverse regulatory finding.
    * 12.2 Upon expiry of the MTA pursuant to clause 11.1 above or termination of this MTA by UK Biobank pursuant to clause 12.1 or in accordance with law:
        * 12.2.1 the grant of rights and all licences to the Applicant under this MTA shall be automatically terminated; and
        * 12.2.2 the Applicant shall destroy the Materials or otherwise render them permanently inaccessible and confirm in writing to access@ukbiobank.ac.uk that this has been done. For the avoidance of doubt, the Applicant shall not be required to destroy Results Data or Other Data subject to the provisions of this MTA being complied with.
    * 12.3 Without prejudice to the foregoing and to any other rights or remedies that UK Biobank may have, UK Biobank may take the following steps if there is a breach that entitles UK Biobank to terminate this MTA under clause 12.1:
        * 12.3.1 it may prohibit the Applicant PI, Applicant Researchers and any other researchers from the Applicant Institution from accessing any further Materials from within the UK Biobank resource for an indefinite period of time; and/or
        * 12.3.2 it may elect to inform the relevant personnel within the defaulting Applicant Institution, funders of the defaulting Applicant PI and/or governing or other relevant regulatory bodies.
    * 12.4 Notwithstanding termination of this MTA for any reason, the provisions of clauses 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16 and 17 shall continue in force in accordance with their respective terms.
    * 12.5 Termination or expiry of this MTA shall not affect the rights and obligations of the parties accrued at the date or termination or expiry.
* 13. Notices
    * 13.1 Notices required under this MTA shall be in writing and shall be:
        * 13.1.1 sent by email to the addresses set out below; or
        * 13.1.2 (in the event of failure to deliver an email) by post to the registered address of UK Biobank or the Applicant.
    * 13.2 Any notice shall be deemed to be received:
        * 13.2.1 if sent by email, upon receipt at the recipient’s email server, (or, if this time falls outside business hours in the place of receipt, when business hours resume); or
        * 13.2.2 if sent by post, on the date of delivery if a business day in the place of receipt (or, if not a business day, on the first business day thereafter).
    * 13.3 Notices to UK Biobank shall be sent to the access team at access@ukbiobank.ac.uk. Notices to the Applicant shall be sent by email to the relevant Applicant and the Applicant PI.
* 14. Affiliates, assignment and sub-contracting
    * Affiliates
    * 14.1 The rights granted to the Applicant under this MTA for the Approved Research Project include the Affiliates of the Applicant, subject to the Applicant:
        * 14.1.1 providing updated details of each Affiliate in the Annual Project Report submitted to UK Biobank on an annual basis in accordance with clause 7.1 of the MTA;
        * 14.1.2 remaining fully liable and responsible to UK Biobank for all acts, defaults and omissions of each of its Affiliates as if they were the Applicant’s own; and
        * 14.1.3 ensuring that each of its Affiliates comply with the terms and conditions of this MTA.
    * Assignment
    * 14.2 Neither UK Biobank nor the Applicant shall be entitled to assign this MTA or any of its rights or obligations hereunder without first having received the written approval of the other party, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld or delayed.
    * Subcontracting
    * 14.3 Other than in the circumstances set out in clause 14.5, the Applicant shall not sub-contract the performance of any of its obligations under the MTA or any part thereof without having first obtained the prior written consent of UK Biobank, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld.
    * 14.4 In the event that consent is granted under clause 14.3, the relevant Applicant shall be responsible for the acts, defaults and omissions of its sub-contractors as if they were the Applicant’s own, and any consent given shall not relieve such relevant Applicant of any of its obligations under this MTA.
    * Third-Party Processors
    * 14.5 UK Biobank acknowledges and agrees that the Applicant may subcontract to third party processors to process the Materials strictly for the Permitted Purpose and only in relation to discrete elements of data computation and analysis (such processors being, "Third-Party Processors"). The Applicant must comply with, and only engage Third-Party Processors strictly in accordance with the terms set out in clauses 14.6 to 14.10 inclusive.
    * 14.6 The Applicant warrants that the Third-Party Processor is not a Collaborator and shall only be engaged for the purposes of discrete elements of data computation and analysis in relation to the Permitted Purpose (the "Processor Task").
    * 14.7 Prior to engaging a Third-Party Processor, the Applicant shall conduct and document the following assessment:
        * 14.7.1 whether the Third-Party Processor is necessary for the progress of the research aims of the Approved Research Project;
        * 14.7.2 whether the Third-Party Processor is a suitable recipient for the data in terms of both its provenance on past data security and past data usage / activities (for example Cambridge Analytica would not qualify); and
        * 14.7.3 whether the Third-Party Processor is able to provide sufficient assurance(s) that it shall process the Materials in a manner that will meet the requirements of Data Protection Legislation.
    * 14.8 The Applicant shall:
        * 14.8.1 remain fully responsible to UK Biobank for all acts, defaults and omissions of the Third-Party Processor as if they were the Applicant's own;
        * 14.8.2 provide only such Materials to the Third-Party Processor as is strictly necessary for the Third-Party Processor to perform the Processor Task;
        * 14.8.3 provide details of each Third-Party Processor and the Processor Task in the Annual Project Report submitted to UK Biobank on an annual basis in accordance with clause 7.1 of the MTA; and
        * 14.8.4 only engage the Third-Party Processor on the basis that a written agreement with the Third-Party Processor is executed prior to any data transfer or processing of Materials taking place. Such agreement must include inter alia:
            * (a) a clear definition and scope of the Processor Task, including an agreement only to process the data in accordance with the Applicant’s documented instructions;
            * (b) to authorise the Third-Party Processor only to undertake the Processor Task and not to perform any other act, unless expressly authorised to do so;
            * (c) to store, process and use the Materials to the security standards set out in the MTA (as a minimum) and implements appropriate technical and organisational security measures to protect the Materials against a Data Security Incident;
            * (d) to delete (or render permanently inaccessible) the Materials (and any data generated as a result of the Processor Task) once the Processor Task has been completed;
            * (e) to confirm that the Third-Party Processor has no rights (directly or indirectly) in either any Materials (or data derived therefrom) or from anything which the Applicant has created or done as part of the Approved Research Project (which is covered by the MTA between UK Biobank and the Applicant);
            * (f) to confirm that the Third-Party Processor is bound by the provisions which are equivalent to the relevant provisions in the MTA, including, but not limited to: a) not to transfer the Materials (or data derived therefrom) to any third party and b) not to make any attempt to re-identify any Participant;
            * (g) that the Third-Party Processor provides sufficient assurance(s) that it shall process the Materials in a manner that will meet the requirement of Data Protection Legislation; and
            * (h) that the Applicant has an unfettered unilateral right to terminate its agreement with the Third-Party Processor immediately if a material problem arises (including a breach by the Third-Party Processor of any of the above provisions).
    * 14.9 The Applicant must keep the activities of the Third-Party Processor under reasonable review in order to ensure compliance with clauses 14.5 to 14.10 inclusive.
    * 14.10 In the event that UK Biobank raises any concern regarding the identity of the Third-Party Processor or the activities of a Third-Party Processor, the Applicant shall investigate and report on the matter promptly. UK Biobank may require, if reasonably necessary (and subject to a dialogue with the Applicant), the Applicant to:
        * 14.10.1 to audit the Third-Party Processor; and / or
        * 14.10.2 terminate the agreement with the Third-Party Processor.
* 15. Force majeure
    * 15.1 If a party is prevented from, hindered or delayed in performing any of its obligations under this MTA by reason of a Force Majeure Event, such party shall promptly notify the other of the date of its commencement and the effects of the Force Majeure Event on its ability to perform its obligations under this MTA. If mutually agreed by the parties, then the obligations of the party so affected shall thereupon be suspended for so long as the Force Majeure Event may continue.
    * 15.2 The party affected by a Force Majeure Event shall not be liable for any failure to perform or delay in performing such of its obligations as are prevented, hindered or delayed by the Force Majeure Event provided that such party shall use every reasonable effort to minimise the effects thereof and shall resume performance as soon as possible after the removal of such Force Majeure Event. If the period of non-performance exceeds 90 days from the start of the Force Majeure Event then the non-affected party shall have the option, by written notice to the other party, to terminate this MTA by giving thirty (30) days’ written notice to the other party.
    * 15.3 The provisions of this clause 15 shall not affect any other right which any party may have to terminate this MTA.
* 16. Dispute resolution
    * 16.1 If a Dispute arises, the parties shall follow the procedure set out in this clause 16.
    * 16.2 Either party may give the other party written notice of a Dispute, setting out its nature and full particulars ("Notice of Dispute"), together with relevant supporting documents. Within five (5) business days of service of the Notice of Dispute, a UK Biobank representative and a representative from the Applicant shall attempt in good faith to resolve such Dispute.
    * 16.3 If for any reason the respective representatives of the parties are unable to resolve the Dispute within ten (10) business days of the Notice of Dispute, then any of the parties involved in the respective Dispute may refer it for discussion by UK Biobank's Principal Investigator and appropriate senior officer(s) of the Applicant. These senior representatives of the parties (or their respective nominees) shall seek to arrange a meeting or telephone, or videoconference call promptly with a view to resolving the Dispute.
    * 16.4 If, following escalation of any Dispute as set out in clause 16.3, UK Biobank's Principal Investigator and appropriate senior officer(s) of the Applicant are for any reason unable to resolve the Dispute within thirty (30) business days of it being escalated to them, then the parties agree to enter into mediation in good faith the settle the Dispute in accordance with the Centre for Effective Dispute Resolution (CEDR) Model Mediation Procedure. Unless otherwise agreed between the parties within 20 business days of service of the Notice of Dispute, the mediator shall be nominated by CEDR. To initiate the mediation, a party must serve notice in writing to the other party to the Dispute, referring the Dispute to mediation.
    * 16.5 For avoidance of doubt, Disputes with respect to scientific or technical issues or business decisions, and not legal issues, shall remain with senior representatives to be resolved.
    * 16.6 If the Dispute is not settled by mediation within 10 business days of commencement of mediation or within such further period as the parties may agree in writing, either party may issue court proceedings in accordance with clause 17.10 of this MTA.
    * 16.7 Nothing in this clause 16 shall serve to prevent any of the parties from seeking interim/injunctive relief to protect its rights and interests in any court of England and Wales; provided that such relief shall not prevent or stay any mediation.
* 17. General
    * 17.1 The parties agree that the Applicant may change the Applicant PI at any time, and from time to time, by written notice to UK Biobank provided that the Applicant ensures that the identity/status of the new Applicant PI is compliant with UK Biobank’s access criteria, access procedures and the relevant terms of this MTA.
    * 17.2 This MTA governs and constitutes the entire agreement between the parties and supersedes, replaces and extinguishes all previous agreements, promises, assurances, warranties, representations and understandings between them (whether oral or written) relating to the subject matter hereof. Further, each party acknowledges and agrees that it does not rely on, and shall have no remedy in respect of, any statement, promise, assurance, statement, warranty, undertaking or representation made (whether innocently or negligently) by the other party or any other person except as expressly set out in this MTA in respect of which its sole remedy shall be for breach of contract.
    * 17.3 If there is any conflict between the provisions of this MTA and any of the Annexes, then the provisions of the relevant Annex shall apply.
    * 17.4 A waiver, delay or forbearance by any party, whether express or implied, in enforcing or exercising any of its rights or remedies hereunder shall not constitute a waiver of such right or remedy, unless set forth in a writing signed by the waiving party.
    * 17.5 No provision of this MTA is intended to be enforceable by any person who is not a party to this MTA and nor are any rights granted to any third party under statute or otherwise.
    * 17.6 Nothing in this MTA shall create a partnership, joint venture or relationship of agency among the parties.
    * 17.7 All variations to this MTA must be agreed, set out in writing and signed on behalf of the parties before they take effect.
    * 17.8 If any provision or part-provision of this MTA is or becomes invalid, illegal or unenforceable, it shall be deemed deleted, but that shall not affect the validity and enforceability of the rest of this MTA.
    * 17.9 If any provision or part-provision of this MTA is deemed deleted under clause 17.8, the parties shall negotiate in good faith to agree a replacement provision that, to the greatest extent possible, achieves the intended commercial result of the original provision.
    * 17.10 This MTA and any dispute or claim (including non-contractual disputes or claims) arising out of or in connection with it or its subject matter or formation shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of England and Wales. Subject to clause 16 above, the parties irrevocably agree that the English courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction over any suit, action, proceedings or dispute arising out of, or in connection with this MTA or its subject matter or formation.