* UKBB 7.1: Annually, the Applicant PI must confirm that the Approved Research Project is compliant with the provisions of this MTA by providing an Annual Project Report to the international BB.
* UKBB 7.2: If the international BB reasonably believes a Data Security Incident or other serious incident has occurred, it may, with notice to the Applicant, audit the security, storage, or other arrangements for the Materials. The international BB may also request additional information about the Approved Research Project and its progress. **If requested, the User Institution will allow data security and management documentation to be inspected to verify that it is complying with the terms of this agreement.** _The international BB (or its agents) may audit the Researcher's use of the Data to ensure compliance with this Agreement._
* UKBB 7.3: The international BB will cover the costs of audits, but if a material default is found in the Applicant's procedures, the Applicant must reimburse the reasonable costs of the international BB and any third parties.
* UKBB 7.4: _Any such audits will be conducted during the Researcher's regular business hours with reasonable advanced notice and consideration for the Researcher's business operations._ The international BB's audit rights can be exercised no more than once a year, with reasonable notice (which can be immediate in case of a Data Security Incident or other serious incident). When possible, the international BB agrees to coordinate site visits and audits with other relevant parties.
* UKBB 8.1: Subject to exceptions, the international BB shall keep confidential any information disclosed in writing by the Applicant and marked confidential. **The international BB agrees to preserve the confidentiality of the Data at all times.** _The Researcher agrees that it will not disclose to others or use for its own benefit or the benefit of others, any Data or other Confidential Information disclosed by the international BB in the course of this Agreement._
* UKBB 8.2: The international BB may disclose the Applicant's Confidential Information where expressly permitted by this MTA or when disclosure is required by law, by a regulatory authority, or by a court; or if the information was known to the international BB before disclosure, was lawfully disclosed by a third party without restrictions, or was in the public domain. Disclosure is also permitted if the international BB and the Applicant reasonably agree that the information is trivial or obvious, or they agree in writing to permit the disclosure.
* UKBB 9.1: The parties acknowledge that the international BB and the Applicant are independent controllers with respect to the Participant Level Data and that the Applicant will process the data strictly for the Permitted Purpose. The parties will not process the data as joint controllers. _The Researcher shall perform the Research and use the Data in strict compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations (including but not limited to HIPAA)._
* UKBB 9.2: Each party is individually and separately responsible for complying with its obligations as a controller under Data Protection Legislation. _The Researcher shall perform the Research and use the Data in strict compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations (including but not limited to HIPAA)._
* UKBB 9.3: If the Applicant receives correspondence from a Participant, regulator, or third party about the processing of Participant Level Data, they must inform the international BB, get written approval before responding, and allow the international BB to respond directly.
* UKBB 9.4: Where the international BB transfers Participant Level Data to an Applicant outside the UK to a territory without an adequate level of protection, the UK Addendum shall be automatically incorporated into this MTA.
* UKBB 9.5: If there is any conflict between the MTA and the UK Addendum, the UK Addendum will prevail.
* UKBB 9.6: The Applicant shall not process any Participant Level Data in a territory outside of the UK (or a subsequent territory) unless they have taken the necessary measures to ensure the transfer complies with Data Protection Legislation. **The User Institution agrees only to transfer or disclose these Data, in whole or part, or any material derived from these Data, to the Authorised Personnel.**