* 1. Supply of Materials by UK Biobank
    * 1.1 UK Biobank agrees to supply the Materials to the Applicant in the timeframe and manner set out in this MTA, subject to the provisions of this MTA.
    * 1.2 UK Biobank warrants to the Applicant that for the purposes of this MTA:
        * 1.2.1 it is entitled to supply the Materials to the Applicant;
        * 1.2.2 consent to take part in UK Biobank has been obtained from the Participants and further, consent under the Human Tissue Act 2004, has been obtained from the relevant Participants; and
        * 1.2.3 the use of the Materials for the Approved Research Project falls within UK Biobank's generic Research Tissue Bank (RTB) approval from the NHS North West REC, available here.
    * 1.3 The Applicant agrees that the Materials are provided on an "as is" basis without any warranty of satisfactory quality or fitness for a particular purpose or use, or that use of the Materials shall not infringe the rights of any third party. Except as expressly stated in this MTA, all warranties, terms and conditions, whether express or implied by statute, common law or otherwise, are excluded to the fullest extent permitted by law.
* 2. Usage of Materials by the Applicant
    * 2.1 The Applicant agrees that the Materials:
        * 2.1.1 shall only be used in accordance with the terms and conditions of this MTA;
        * 2.1.2 shall only be used to conduct the Approved Research Project for the Permitted Purpose only;
        * 2.1.3 shall not be used for any purpose connected with prohibited weapons (including biological weapons), and shall not be transferred if it is known or suspected that they are intended or likely to be used for such purposes;
        * 2.1.4 shall not be transferred to a destination subject to a UN, EU, UK or OSCE embargo where that act would be in breach of the terms of that embargo; and
        * 2.1.5 shall only be used by the Applicant institution and on an individual level within the Applicant, by the Applicant Pl, the Applicant Researchers and by Affiliates and Third-Party Processors (appointed by the Applicant).
    * 2.2 The Applicant shall not share, sub-license, disclose, transfer, sell, gift or supply the Materials to any other person or unauthorised third party.
    * 2.3 Without prejudice to the other provisions of this MTA, any actual or anticipatory breach of any provision of clauses 2.1 or 2.2 shall entitle UK Biobank to terminate this Agreement with immediate effect and require the immediate return or destruction of any Materials provided by UK Biobank.
    * 2.4 The Applicant shall and shall procure cure that the Applicant Pl, the Applicant Researchers and any Affiliate and any Third-Party Processors are made aware of, and shall comply with, the terms and conditions of this MTA and the Data Protection Legislation. Any act or omission of the Applicant Pl or any Applicant Researcher or any Affiliate or any Third-Party Processor shall be deemed to be an act of the relevant Applicant for which the relevant Applicant is fully responsible and liable.
    * 2.5 This MTA confers on the Applicant only those rights that are expressly granted to the Applicant.
    * 2.6 In relation to the Materials supplied to the Applicant:
        * 2.6.1 UK Biobank is the owner of the Materials, and UK Biobank is the owner of the Intellectual Property Rights in the Materials; and
        * 2.6.2 UK Biobank hereby grants to the Applicant a revocable, worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive, non-transferable licence (but not any ownership rights) during the Term to use the Materials for the Permitted Purpose, subject to the terms and conditions of this MTA.
* 3. Generation of data by the Applicant
    * 3.1 The data generated by the Applicant in the performance of the Approved Research Project shall be deemed to fall into the following categories:
        * 3.1.1 Results Data: data and methodology (for example, the SAS/R/Stata scripts) which underlie the Findings, and which would enable another competent researcher to generate the Findings;
        * 3.1.2 Findings: the findings generated by the Applicant as a result of the Approved Research Project; and/or
        * 3.1.3 Other Data: all other data generated by the Applicant which is not in one of the above two categories.
    * 3.2 Except as provided in clause 3.3, the Applicant shall own the IPRs in their Findings, the Results Data and the Other Data. The Applicant hereby grants a perpetual, irrevocable, worldwide, fully paid up, royalty free, fully sub-licensable non-exclusive licence to UK Biobank to use, reproduce, distribute, publish, store and otherwise disseminate the Findings, the Results Data and the Other Data.
    * 3.3 Nothing in this MTA shall operate to assign to the Applicant any IPRs in the Materials.
    * 3.4 The Applicant confirms to UK Biobank that UK Biobank's receipt of and use of the Applicant's Findings and Results Data shall not infringe the rights, including any existing IPRS, of any third party. Such confirmation shall be:
        * 3.4.1 deemed to be taken at the time, respectively, of the publication of the Findings or the return of the Results Data to UK Biobank; and
        * 3.4.2 given to the best of the Applicant's knowledge and belief, having made reasonable and diligent enquiry (but the extent of this obligation does not include any requirement on the Applicant to conduct external patent searches).
    * 3.5 Subject always to the restriction in clause 3.7, UK Biobank confirms that it shall have no rights or licence to the IPRs in relation to any inventions made by the Applicant as a result of using the Materials, Results Data, Findings or Other Data ("Applicant-Generated Inventions").
    * 3.6 However, the Applicant acknowledges that the UK Biobank resource has been produced using a combination of the goodwill and contribution of 500,000 UK participants, charitable and public funding, the use of public resources (such as UK health-record data) and established with the express purpose of promoting the conduct of health-related research which is in the public interest.
    * 3.7 Taking into account the acknowledgements in clause 3.6, the Applicant agrees that it shall not and shall not attempt to:
        * 3.7.1 file any patents with claims directed to; or
        * 3.7.2 otherwise seek to claim or enforce any IPRs in;
        * the genotype-phenotype data within the Materials or in the genotype-phenotype data which has been generated by the Applicant in the course of the Approved Research Project.
    * 3.8 UK Biobank expressly excludes any right of the Applicant to sub-licence any of the rights granted to the Materials under this MTA or to publish or distribute any of the Materials, except for the sole purpose of including a commensurate amount of supporting data in the Applicant's publication of its Findings.
    * 3.9 For the avoidance of doubt, the rights granted under this MTA to the Applicant to use the Materials are for the Permitted Purpose only.
* 4. Confirmations from the Applicant
    * 4.1 The Applicant confirms to UK Biobank that all work performed by it using the Materials shall be carried out in compliance with:
        * 4.1.1 all applicable laws, regulations, guidelines and approvals, including without limitation the Human Tissue Act 2004, the Data Protection Legislation and any approvals required from a Research Ethics Committee (or the applicable equivalent in the jurisdiction where the Approved Research Project is to be conducted); and
        * 4.1.2 all applicable trade restrictions and export controls, including without limitation all sanctions, meaning those trade, economic and financial sanctions laws, regulations, embargoes, and restrictive measures (in each case having the force of law) administered, enacted or enforced from time to time by (i) the United Kingdom; (ii) the United States; (iii) the European Union and its Member States; (iv) the United Nations; or (v) other governments.
    * 4.2 The Applicant shall retain the Materials in a secure network system, at a standard which would be reasonably expected for the storage of valuable and proprietary sensitive/confidential data. In addition, the Applicant shall be obliged to implement the appropriate technical and organisational measures as set out in Annex 2 (Security Measures) to protect the Materials from the accidental or unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, or access to the Materials (a "Data Security Incident"). By signing this MTA, the Applicant Pl confirms that the Security Measures set out in Annex 2 are in place in order to protect the Materials.
    * 4.3 The Applicant shall notify UK Biobank without undue delay (and in any event no later than 24 hours) after becoming aware of a reasonably suspected "near miss" or actual Data Security Incident which affects the Materials. Such notification must be sent by email to DPO@ukbiobank.ac.uk with a copy to access@ukbiobank.ac.uk.
        * 4.3.1 The Applicant shall not delay such notification on the basis that the information is incomplete, or the relevant investigation is ongoing. Further, the Applicant shall not make any external announcement, notifications to a supervisory authority or regulator about any such Data Security Incident without the express prior written consent of UK Biobank, unless required by law to do so.
        * 4.3.2 Both parties shall cooperate and provide reasonable assistance to each other to facilitate the handling of the Data Security Incident.
    * 4.4 The Applicant confirms that it shall deal promptly and appropriately (in accordance with the Participants option to withdraw as set out on the UK Biobank website here) with any "no further use" withdrawals by Participants which UK Biobank notifies to the Applicant.
    * 4.5 The Applicant is expressly prohibited from (or attempting to):
        * 4.5.1 developing, linking or re-engineering the Materials supplied to it so as to identify (directly or indirectly) any Participant;
        * 4.5.2 identifying any Participant from the Materials provided by UK Biobank; or
        * 4.5.3 contacting any Participant.
    * 4.6 In the event that the Applicant inadvertently identifies any Participant then it shall notify UK Biobank immediately setting out (in reasonable detail) the circumstances by which it happened. Such notification must be sent by email to DPO@ukbiobank.ac.uk with a copy to access@ukbiobank.ac.uk.
    * 4.7 Other than for the purposes of clause 4.6, the Applicant shall not:
        * 4.7.1 share the identification of that Participant with any other person; or
        * 4.7.2 attempt to contact the Participant themselves.
    * 4.8 Without prejudice to the other provisions of this MTA, any actual or anticipatory breach of any provision of clauses 4.1, 4.2 and 4.4 to 4.7 inclusive shall entitle UK Biobank to terminate this Agreement with immediate effect and require the immediate return or destruction of any Materials provided by UK Biobank.
* 5. Publication of lay summary, submission of annual report and return and publication of Findings
    * 5.1 After the Applicant has received the Materials for the Approved Research Project, UK Biobank shall be entitled to publish on its website:
        * 5.1.1 the lay summary of the Approved Research Project contained in the Application (with the exception of any material that has been agreed by UK Biobank would be kept confidential); and
        * 5.1.2 summary details of the Applicant.
    * 5.2 During the Term, the Applicant shall provide UK Biobank with:
        * 5.2.1 a report (with a summary section) setting out in reasonable detail the progress of the Approved Research Project in the form attached as Annex 3 (or in such other format as required by UK Biobank from time to time) on an annual basis (from the Effective Date) which shall include the Findings the Applicant has made which in its reasonable view may be:
            * (a) published or pending publication;
            * (b) disclosed in a published patent; or
            * (c) otherwise of significance (in the context of medical research); and
        * 5.2.2 a summary (and a copy of the application if requested) of any patents whose claims cover, or are intended to cover, an Applicant-Generated Invention within two (2) months of their publication.
    * 5.3 In relation to the Annual Project Report, UK Biobank:
        * 5.3.1 shall have the ability to make the summary section of the Annual Project Report public, subject to the Applicant (as referred to in clause 5.7 below) retaining a reasonable period of confidentiality on items where patent rights still need to be filed; and
        * 5.3.2 shall have the opportunity to ask the Applicant any reasonable questions arising from the Annual Project Report and the Applicant shall respond to such questions in a timely manner.
    * 5.4 If the Annual Project Report, or any other information or data provided to UK Biobank, contains any technology or data that is subject to applicable export controls, it shall be the responsibility of the Applicant to obtain any export licence that may be required to authorise the transmission of the Annual Project Report, information or data to UK Biobank. The Applicant shall notify UK Biobank at least one week in advance that an Annual Project Report, information or data is to be sent under an export licence and shall provide UK Biobank with full details of the conditions of the licence and of the reasons for the control of the technology contained in the Annual Project Report, information or data.
    * 5.5 In the event that the Annual Project Report is not received by UK Biobank in the timeframe, manner and form prescribed, then the Applicant's rights under this MTA shall be suspended and the Applicant (together with any Collaborators) will not be able to download further data (either in terms of new data fields or updates of existing data fields) or access existing data via the research access platform until such time as the Annual Project Report has been duly and compliantly provided. If the Annual Project Report is still outstanding, notwithstanding reminders from UK Biobank, 3 months after the relevant anniversary of the Effective Date, then UK Biobank has the right to terminate this MTA by giving the Applicant written notice of termination and/or prevent the Applicant Institution (or Applicant PI) from applying for or accessing any further Materials from UK Biobank.
    * 5.6 The Applicant shall use All Reasonable Endeavours to publish the Findings (and provide UK Biobank with a link thereto) within six (6) months after the Completion Date for the Approved Research Project:
        * 5.6.1 in an academic journal; or
        * 5.6.2 on an open-source publication site.
    * 5.7 UK Biobank acknowledge and agree that the Applicant may keep such Findings confidential for a reasonable time in accordance with its reasonable research and development practices. For the avoidance of doubt, the Applicant is entitled to retain confidentiality regarding any Finding over which patent protection is being sought (and the patent has not yet been published).
    * 5.8 If such Findings are made publicly available, UK Biobank requires that the Results Data underlying such Findings shall be promptly returned or otherwise made available to UK Biobank. UK Biobank also requires that the Results Data are returned in a format which is appropriate and comprehensible (particularly for other researchers) along with any documentation which would be reasonably necessary to enable another researcher to interpret and understand the Results Data.
    * 5.9 Within six (6) months after the publication of the Findings, the relevant Applicant shall provide to UK Biobank the Results Data in such form and format as set out in clause 5.8 above (alternatively UK Biobank and the relevant Applicant may agree that the relevant Applicant retains the Results Data on the basis that they are made publicly available to other Researchers and/or publicly available generally).
    * 5.10 UK Biobank shall consider reasonably any written requests (containing an appropriate explanation) for an extension of the time limits set out in this clause.
    * 5.11 The Applicant shall use All Reasonable Endeavours to publish a commensurate level of Findings in relation to the Approved Research Project within the first three (3) years of the Term (and in any subsequent extensions). Where this is not possible, the Applicant shall provide UK Biobank with a reasonable explanation as to why it is not possible and an estimation of when a publication can be expected.
    * 5.12 Unless otherwise stated in Annex 4, the Applicant is not required to obtain UK Biobank's approval to any report of its Findings. The Applicant shall nevertheless provide a copy of any report of its Findings and any press release to UK Biobank at least two (2) weeks before their expected date of first public presentation or publication in any format (e.g., paper journal, on-line report, meeting abstract). The Applicant shall upload such documents to AMS in the first instance. If this is not possible, the Applicant shall email such documents to access@ukbiobank.ac.uk.
    * 5.13 However, and notwithstanding the provisions of clause 5.12 above, the Applicant is required to promptly notify UK Biobank in advance (in writing) if any report of its Findings is reasonably likely to provoke controversy or otherwise attract significant public attention. In such circumstances, UK Biobank reserves the right to make such recommendations, reservations or suggestions on the report as it sees fit (and which it may make public) for consideration by the Applicant.
    * 5.14 UK Biobank requires that the term "UK Biobank" is incorporated within the title and/or the abstract of any and all publications.
    * 5.15 UK Biobank requires that any and all publications of Findings using UK Biobank data include the following credit, which should be incorporated within the "Acknowledgements" of such publication: "This research has been conducted using the UK Biobank Resource under application number [ ]."
    * 5.16 This acknowledgement to UK Biobank should, when possible, be linked to reference search tools (such as PubMed and MEDLINE and/or DOI reference).
* 6. Charges
    * 6.1 The Applicant agrees to pay the Access Charges as set out in the payment section of the Applicant's Application to UK Biobank via bank transfer or Sage Pay, and in British pounds sterling (GBP). The Access Charges are stated to be exclusive of VAT. The Applicant shall pay any applicable VAT in addition to the Access Charges.
    * 6.2 When paying the Access Charges, the Applicant shall quote the invoice number and/or Application Reference Number as the payment reference, and also send a remittance note to creditcontrol@ukbiobank.ac.uk.
    * 6.3 The rights granted to the Applicant by UK Biobank under this MTA are conditional on the Access Charges (and applicable VAT) being paid and so, for the avoidance of doubt, no Materials shall be provided to the Applicant until or unless the Access Charges (and applicable VAT) are received in full.
    * 6.4 If payment of the Access Charges (and applicable VAT) has not been made within ninety (90) days of receipt of this MTA by the Applicant, the Applicant shall be required to re-apply for access to the UK Biobank resource and Materials.
