* 1. Supply of Materials by UK Biobank
    * 1.1 UK Biobank agrees to supply the Materials to the Applicant in the timeframe and manner set out in this MTA, subject to the provisions of this MTA.
    * 1.2 UK Biobank warrants to the Applicant that for the purposes of this MTA:
        * 1.2.1 it is entitled to supply the Materials to the Applicant;
        * 1.2.2 consent to take part in UK Biobank has been obtained from the Participants and further, consent under the Human Tissue Act 2004, has been obtained from the relevant Participants; and
        * 1.2.3 the use of the Materials for the Approved Research Project falls within UK Biobank's generic Research Tissue Bank (RTB) approval from the NHS North West REC, available here.
    * 1.3 The Applicant agrees that the Materials are provided on an "as is" basis without any warranty of satisfactory quality or fitness for a particular purpose or use, or that use of the Materials shall not infringe the rights of any third party. Except as expressly stated in this MTA, all warranties, terms and conditions, whether express or implied by statute, common law or otherwise, are excluded to the fullest extent permitted by law.
* 2. Usage of Materials by the Applicant
    * 2.1 The Applicant agrees that the Materials:
        * 2.1.1 shall only be used in accordance with the terms and conditions of this MTA;
        * 2.1.2 shall only be used to conduct the Approved Research Project for the Permitted Purpose only;
        * 2.1.3 shall not be used for any purpose connected with prohibited weapons (including biological weapons), and shall not be transferred if it is known or suspected that they are intended or likely to be used for such purposes;
        * 2.1.4 shall not be transferred to a destination subject to a UN, EU, UK or OSCE embargo where that act would be in breach of the terms of that embargo; and
        * 2.1.5 shall only be used by the Applicant institution and on an individual level within the Applicant, by the Applicant Pl, the Applicant Researchers and by Affiliates and Third-Party Processors (appointed by the Applicant).
    * 2.2 The Applicant shall not share, sub-license, disclose, transfer, sell, gift or supply the Materials to any other person or unauthorised third party.
    * 2.3 Without prejudice to the other provisions of this MTA, any actual or anticipatory breach of any provision of clauses 2.1 or 2.2 shall entitle UK Biobank to terminate this Agreement with immediate effect and require the immediate return or destruction of any Materials provided by UK Biobank.
    * 2.4 The Applicant shall and shall procure cure that the Applicant Pl, the Applicant Researchers and any Affiliate and any Third-Party Processors are made aware of, and shall comply with, the terms and conditions of this MTA and the Data Protection Legislation. Any act or omission of the Applicant Pl or any Applicant Researcher or any Affiliate or any Third-Party Processor shall be deemed to be an act of the relevant Applicant for which the relevant Applicant is fully responsible and liable.
    * 2.5 This MTA confers on the Applicant only those rights that are expressly granted to the Applicant.
    * 2.6 In relation to the Materials supplied to the Applicant:
        * 2.6.1 UK Biobank is the owner of the Materials, and UK Biobank is the owner of the Intellectual Property Rights in the Materials; and
        * 2.6.2 UK Biobank hereby grants to the Applicant a revocable, worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive, non-transferable licence (but not any ownership rights) during the Term to use the Materials for the Permitted Purpose, subject to the terms and conditions of this MTA.
* 3. Generation of data by the Applicant
    * 3.1 The data generated by the Applicant in the performance of the Approved Research Project shall be deemed to fall into the following categories:
        * 3.1.1 Results Data: data and methodology (for example, the SAS/R/Stata scripts) which underlie the Findings, and which would enable another competent researcher to generate the Findings;
        * 3.1.2 Findings: the findings generated by the Applicant as a result of the Approved Research Project; and/or
        * 3.1.3 Other Data: all other data generated by the Applicant which is not in one of the above two categories.
    * 3.2 Except as provided in clause 3.3, the Applicant shall own the IPRs in their Findings, the Results Data and the Other Data. The Applicant hereby grants a perpetual, irrevocable, worldwide, fully paid up, royalty free, fully sub-licensable non-exclusive licence to UK Biobank to use, reproduce, distribute, publish, store and otherwise disseminate the Findings, the Results Data and the Other Data.
    * 3.3 Nothing in this MTA shall operate to assign to the Applicant any IPRs in the Materials.
    * 3.4 The Applicant confirms to UK Biobank that UK Biobank's receipt of and use of the Applicant's Findings and Results Data shall not infringe the rights, including any existing IPRS, of any third party. Such confirmation shall be:
        * 3.4.1 deemed to be taken at the time, respectively, of the publication of the Findings or the return of the Results Data to UK Biobank; and
        * 3.4.2 given to the best of the Applicant's knowledge and belief, having made reasonable and diligent enquiry (but the extent of this obligation does not include any requirement on the Applicant to conduct external patent searches).
    * 3.5 Subject always to the restriction in clause 3.7, UK Biobank confirms that it shall have no rights or licence to the IPRs in relation to any inventions made by the Applicant as a result of using the Materials, Results Data, Findings or Other Data ("Applicant-Generated Inventions").
    * 3.6 However, the Applicant acknowledges that the UK Biobank resource has been produced using a combination of the goodwill and contribution of 500,000 UK participants, charitable and public funding, the use of public resources (such as UK health-record data) and established with the express purpose of promoting the conduct of health-related research which is in the public interest.
    * 3.7 Taking into account the acknowledgements in clause 3.6, the Applicant agrees that it shall not and shall not attempt to:
        * 3.7.1 file any patents with claims directed to; or
        * 3.7.2 otherwise seek to claim or enforce any IPRs in;
        * the genotype-phenotype data within the Materials or in the genotype-phenotype data which has been generated by the Applicant in the course of the Approved Research Project.
    * 3.8 UK Biobank expressly excludes any right of the Applicant to sub-licence any of the rights granted to the Materials under this MTA or to publish or distribute any of the Materials, except for the sole purpose of including a commensurate amount of supporting data in the Applicant's publication of its Findings.
    * 3.9 For the avoidance of doubt, the rights granted under this MTA to the Applicant to use the Materials are for the Permitted Purpose only.
